>> Ifill: ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS
CLAIM VICTORY IN IRAQ.
THE KEY CITY OF RAMADI FALLS
INTO MILITANT HANDS AS
GOVERNMENT SECURITY FORCES
RETREAT AND RESIDENTS FLEE.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY:
BANNING MILITARY-STYLE EQUIPMENT
FOR LOCAL POLICE.
PART OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
PUSH TO EASE TENSIONS BETWEEN
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND THE
COMMUNITIES THEY SERVE.
>> Ifill: PLUS...
>> I LEARNED HOW TO MAKE SALAD
AND HOW TO SING SONGS.
50 YEARS AFTER IT BEGAN, IS HEAD
START LIVING UP TO ITS PROMISES
OF HELPING CHILDREN IN NEED?
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: LEADERS IN BAGHDAD
AND WASHINGTON SCRAMBLED TO
RESPOND TODAY, AFTER ISLAMIC
STATE FORCES SCORED A STUNNING
NEW VICTORY IN IRAQ.
THE FALL OF THE CITY OF RAMADI
PUT A STOP TO RECENT GAINS BY
IRAQI GOVERNMENT FORCES, AND IT
DEALT A BLOW TO THE U.S.
CAMPAIGN TO CONTAIN AND DESTROY
THE EXTREMIST GROUP.
WE'LL LOOK AT REACTIONS TO THIS
REVERSAL AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
>> Ifill: POLICE IN WACO, TEXAS,
WERE ON HIGH ALERT TODAY, AFTER
SUNDAY'S DEADLY SHOOTOUT
INVOLVING FIVE MOTORCYCLE GANGS.
NINE BIKERS WERE KILLED AND AT
LEAST 18 WOUNDED.
THE INCIDENT ERUPTED AS RIVAL
GANGS GATHERED AT A WACO
RESTAURANT.
IN THE AFTERMATH, MORE THAN 170
PEOPLE WERE ARRESTED ON A LONG
LIST OF CHARGES.
>> THEY HAVE SHOWED UP
REPEATEDLY OVER TWO MONTHS AND
HAVE BEEN HERE.
WE'VE HAD A LITTLE BIT OF ISSUE
OUT OF THEM, SOME ARRESTS FOR
WARRANTS, THINGS LIKE THAT,
MINOR SKIRMISHES.
WE HAD PARTICULAR INTELLIGENCE
YESTERDAY THAT THERE WAS GOING
TO BE AN EVEN WORSE GROUP OF
INDIVIDUALS HERE YESTERDAY.
>> Ifill: POLICE ALSO FIRED
SHOTS IN THE GUN BATTLE, BUT
THERE WAS NO WORD ON WHETHER
THEY KILLED OR WOUNDED ANYONE.
>> Woodruff: A TEXAS GRAND JURY
DECIDED TODAY NOT TO CHARGE A
POLICE OFFICER FOR KILLING AN
UNARMED MEXICAN MAN.
IT HAPPENED LAST FEBRUARY IN A
DALLAS SUBURB, AND TRIGGERED
PROTEST RALLIES.
VIDEO FROM A POLICE DASHBOARD
CAMERA SHOWED THE VICTIM WITH
HANDS RAISED, WALKING FORWARD
UNSTEADILY.
THE OFFICER REPEATEDLY CALLED
FOR HIM TO STOP, THEN OPENED
FIRE.
>> Ifill: IN YEMEN, SAUDI-LED
AIR STRIKES RESUMED AGAINST
SHIITE REBELS, AFTER A FIVE-DAY
CEASE-FIRE ENDED SUNDAY.
THERE WAS ALSO NEW FIGHTING IN
SEVERAL CITIES ACROSS YEMEN.
MEANWHILE, THE REBELS' CHIEF
SPONSOR, IRAN, CRITICIZED
DIPLOMATIC TALKS BEING HELD IN
THE SAUDI CAPITAL.
THE SAUDI CAPITAL. >> (
translated): IN FACT,
>> (translated): IN
FACT, SINCE WE CONSIDER RIYADH
AND
SINCE WE CONSIDER RIYADH AND
SAUDI ARABIA AS PART OF THE
CONFLICT, IT CANNOT HOST A
CONFERENCE FOR SOLVING THE
YEMENI CRISIS.
A CONFERENCE OR A NATIONAL
DIALOGUE SHOULD BE HELD
ALONE IN A NEUTRAL COUNTRY THAT
HAS NO LINKS TO RIYADH OR OTHER
SIDES WHO ARE PART OF THE
CONFLICT.
>> Ifill: SO FAR, THE REBELS AND
THEIR ALLIES HAVE BOYCOTTED THE
TALKS.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY FIRED OFF A BROADSIDE
AT NORTH KOREA TODAY, ACCUSING
IT OF "HORRIFIC CONDUCT" ON
HUMAN RIGHTS AND NUCLEAR
WEAPONS.
KERRY SPOKE DURING HIS STOP IN
SOUTH KOREA.
HE SAID THE NORTH IS ACTING WITH
"RECKLESS ABANDON," AND WARNED
THERE COULD BE ADDITIONAL
SANCTIONS.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT MADE IT
EASIER FOR EMPLOYEES TO SUE
THEIR COMPANIES OVER 401-K
RETIREMENT PLANS.
THE JUSTICES RULED UNANIMOUSLY
IN A CHALLENGE TO CHOOSING
MUTUAL FUNDS WITH HIGH FEES.
SEPARATELY, THE COURT REFUSED TO
STOP AN INVESTIGATION OF
GOVERNOR SCOTT WALKER'S 2012
RECALL CAMPAIGN IN WISCONSIN.
AT ISSUE IS WHETHER HE ILLEGALLY
COORDINATED ACTIVITIES WITH
OUTSIDE GROUPS.
HE'S NOW A POTENTIAL REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE.
>> Woodruff: AMTRAK SERVICE
BETWEEN NEW YORK AND
PHILADELPHIA HAS RESUMED FOR THE
FIRST TIME SINCE LAST WEEK'S
DEADLY DERAILMENT.
A NORTHBOUND TRAIN CARRYING
ABOUT 60 PEOPLE LEFT
PHILADELPHIA'S 30th STREET
STATION JUST AFTER 6:00 THIS
MORNING.
A SIMILAR SOUTHBOUND TRAIN
DEPARTED NEW YORK AN HOUR
EARLIER.
THE WRECK KILLED EIGHT PEOPLE
AND INJURED MORE THAN 200.
>> Ifill: AND ON WALL STREET,
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 26 POINTS TO CLOSE NEAR
18,300.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 30 POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 ADDED SIX.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR:
WHAT GAINS BY ISLAMIC STATE
FORCES MEANS FOR THE FUTURE OF
IRAQ.
BANNING LOCAL POLICE FROM USING
MILITARY-STYLE EQUIPMENT.
THE LEGACY OF AD SHETART, 50
YEARS ON.
SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS ON HIS
BID FOR THE WHITE HOUSE.
THE WEEK AHEAD IN POLITICS WITH
AMY WALTER AND TAMARA KEITH.
AND, A DARKER SIDE OF SOCIAL
MEDIA-- A CONTEMPORARY PLATFORM
FOR PUBLIC SHAMING.
>> Ifill: AFTER SUFFERING THEIR
BIGGEST DEFEAT AT THE HANDS OF
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP IN
NEARLY A YEAR, THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT HAS CALLED IN
THOUSANDS OF SHIA MILITIA
FORCES, AND REQUESTED MORE U.S.
AIR STRIKES TO BEAT BACK THE
SUNNI MILITANT GROUP.
THE STREETS OF RAMADI WERE EMPTY
TODAY, AND THE ISLAMIC STATE'S
BLACK FLAG FLEW IN THE CAPITAL
OF IRAQ'S LARGEST PROVINCE,
ANBAR.
CIVILIANS WHO STAYED EVEN AFTER
FIGHTING BROKE OUT LAST MONTH,
WERE FLEEING BY THE THOUSANDS,
TOWARD BAGHDAD.
SO WERE MANY IRAQI TROOPS.
THIS AMATEUR VIDEO APPARENTLY
SHOWS MILITARY AND CIVILIAN
VEHICLES SPEEDING OUT OF TOWN ON
SUNDAY.
IN THEIR WAKE, STOCKPILES OF
WEAPONS WERE LEFT FOR THE
TAKING.
TO THE NORTH, CROWDS GATHERED IN
MOSUL, IRAQ'S SECOND LARGEST
CITY, CAPTURED BY ISIS LAST
JUNE.
THEY CHEED THREE FALL OF RAMADI
AND ANBAR PROVINCE.
AND ANBAR PROVINCE. >> (
translated): THE
CONQUEST
>> (translated): THE
CONQUEST OF ANBAR IS JUST THE
BEGINNING
OF ANBAR IS JUST THE BEGINNING
OF THE CONQUEST OF BAGHDAD,
NAJAF AND KARBALA.
NOW THE CONQUEST HAS BEGUN, NOW
THE FIGHTING HAS BEGUN.
>> Ifill: THE LOSS OF RAMADI MAY
ALSO DELAY PLANS FOR AN IRAQI
OFFENSIVE TO RETAKE MOSUL, WHICH
HAD BEEN IN THE WORKS AFTER
TIKRIT WAS RECAPTURED LAST
MONTH.
IN WASHINGTON, PENTAGON AND
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS
ACKNOWLEDGED THE SETBACK TO
AMERICAN EFFORTS TO CONTAIN
ISIS.
BUT PENTAGON SPOKESMAN COLONEL
STEVE WARREN SAID REPORTERS
SHOULD NOT READ TOO MUCH INTO
THE ISLAMIC STATE VICTORY, AND
THAT IRAQI GROUND FORCES AND
COALITION AIR POWER IS STILL
WORKING.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY,
TRAVELING IN SOUTH KOREA, ALSO
SAID THE CAMPAIGN HAS DEGRADED
THE MILITANTS' FINANCIAL
CAPACITY AND FREEDOM OF
MOVEMENT.
>> BUT THAT'S NOT EVERYWHERE.
AND SO IT IS POSSIBLE TO HAVE
THE KIND OF ATTACK WE'VE SEEN IN
RAMADI.
BUT I'M ABSOLUTELY CONFIDENT IN
THE DAYS AHEAD, THAT WILL BE
REVERSED.
>> Ifill: ON THE BATTLEFIELD,
THE IMMEDIATE U.S. RESPONSE WAS
TO STEP UP AIR STRIKES.
IRAQI PRIME MINISTER HAIDER AL-
ABADI, CALLED UP POWERFUL SHI-
ITE MILITIAS TO FIGHT IN LARGELY
SUNNI ANBAR PROVINCE.
THE MILITIAS INSISTED THEY ARE
READY TO HOLD THEIR GROUND.
READY TO HOLD THEIR GROUND. >> (
translated): WE WILL BE
A
>> (translated): WE
WILL BE A REAL BACKBONE FOR THE
SECURITY
REAL BACKBONE FOR THE SECURITY
FORCES AND WE WILL SUPPORT THE
LEGITIMACY IN IRAQ REPRESENTED
IN THE GOVERNMENT AND
PARLIAMENT.
>> Ifill: SHIITE IRAN IS A
PRINCIPLE SUPPORTER OF THE
MILITIAS, AND IT HELPED
COORDINATE THE SUCCESSFUL FIGHT
TO RETAKE TIKRIT.
A SENIOR IRANIAN OFFICIAL SAID
IN BEIRUT TODAY HIS NATION WILL
HELP AGAIN.
HELP AGAIN. >> (
translated): RAMADI WILL
>> (translated): RAMADI
WILL HAVE THE SAME FATE AS
TIKRIT, IT
HAVE THE SAME FATE AS TIKRIT, IT
WILL BE LIBERATED FROM THE GRASP
OF THE EXTREMIST TERRORISTS AND
VICTORY IN THE END WILL BE FOR
THE IRAQI PEOPLE AND THE IRAQI
STATE.
>> Ifill: AND, IRAN'S DEFENSE
MINISTER FLEW TO BAGHDAD FOR
TALKWITS H THE IRAQI ARMY CHIEF
OF STAFF, ONE DAY AFTER THE TOP
U.S. REGIONAL COMMANDER, GENERAL
LLOYD AUSTIN, WAS THERE.
BACK IN RAMADI, ISLAMIC STATE-
RELATED WEBSITES SHOWED VIDEO OF
HEAVY FIGHTING FROM THE WEEKEND,
AND THE GROUP SAID IT WAS
EXECUTING APOSTATES, A REFERENCE
TO CAPTURED IRAQI TROOPS.
JOINING ME NOW TO TALK ABOUT THE
BATTLE AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE
IS RETIRED COLONEL DEREK HARVEY.
HE'S A FORMER SPECIAL ADVISER
TO THE COMMANDER OF U.S. FORCES
IN IRAQ, AND NOW DIRECTOR FOR
THE GLOBAL INITIATIVE ON CIVIL
SOCIETY AND CONFLICT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH FLORIDA.
AND VALI NASR, A FORMER STATE
DEPARTMENT SENIOR ADVISER.
HE'S NOW DEAN AT THE JOHNS
HOPKINS SCHOOL OF ADVANCED
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES.
VALI NASR, HOW SIGNIFICANT IS
THE FALL OF RAMADI?
>> I THINK SYMBOLICALLY VERY
SIGNIFICANT.
RAMADI IS THE CAPITAL OF ANBAR.
PSYCHOLOGICALLY, IT BOOSTS THE
POSITION OF THE REGION, HELPS
THE RECRUITMENT AND SUGGESTS
THAT THEY ARE FAR FROM ON THEIR
BACK HILL.
>> Ifill: DEREK HARVEY, THE
PENTAGON SPOKESMAN SAID TODAY
NOT TO READ TOO MUCH INTO.
THIS WHAT DO YOU READ INTO IT?
>> I THINK IT CLEARLY SHOWS THE
ISLAMIC STATE IS NOT LOSING,
WHICH MEANS WE'RE NOT WINNING,
AND WE NEED TO RE-THINK OUR
APPROACH, HOW WE'RE RESOURCING
THIS EFFORT AND OUR
DETERMINATION TO ASSIST THE
IRAQI SECURITY FORCES AND
BOLSTER PRIME MINISTER ABADI.
I THINK MOST IMPORTANTLY THAT
PRIME MINISTER ABADI COULD
BECOME WEAKENED AND FURTHER
ISOLATED WHICH WOULD UNDERMINE
THE MAJOR POLITICAL EFFORT THAT
WE'VE HAD IN PLAY IN IRAQ.
WE'VE INVESTED A LOT IN HIM AND
HIS OPPONENTS WILL USE THIS AS
ANOTHER ARROW TO UNDERMINE HIS
POLITICAL STATURE IN THE
COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: THERE IS A POLITICAL
PIECE HERE AND A MILITARY PIECE,
VALI NASR.
HOW MUCH OF THIS CAME TO PASS
BECAUSE OF THE INHERENT WEAKNESS
OF THE IRAQI MILITARY?
>> I THINK IT'S MOSTLY THE
RESULT OF THE WEAKNESS OF THE
IRAQI MILITARY.
THE IRAQI MILITARY COLLAPSED
WHEN I.S.I.S. TOOK MOSUL.
THERTHERE WAS AN EFFORT TO SHORT
UP, AND I THINK THAT WAS COMAJ
RATED.
A LOT OF THE FIGHTING WAS BY
SHIA POLYGAMIST IN PLACES LIKE
TIKRIT AND WE SEE IRAQ IS NOT UP
TO REDEPENDING AGAINST I.S.I.S.
WHEN THEY GO IN ONE DIRECTION,
THAT GIVES I.S.I.S. ROOM TO MOVE
INTO OTHER AREAS.
>> Ifill: WE HEARD OF U.S.
VICTORY OVER A LEADER OF
I.S.I.S., WHICH THE WHITE HOUSE
WAS ANXIOUS TO DISSEMINATE THAT
INFORMATION.
IN ORDER TO MAKE THE CONTINUING
CASE THAT THERE HAS BEEN SOME
VICTORY HERE.
DO YOU SEE THAT?
>> I REALLY DON'T.
YOU KNOW, TAKING OUT A LEADER
WHO IS READILY REPLACEABLE, I
THINK, IN MY JUDGMENT, IS NOT A
MAJOR FACTOR IN THIS CAMPAIGN.
YOU KNOW, WE'VE HAD THESE TYPES
OF TAKEDOWNS OF LEADERS AT
MID-LEVEL AND SENIOR SEVERAL
BEFORE AND THEY'RE REPLACED OVER
TIME.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING ABOUT
THIS ACTION AGAINST ABU, IS THE
DATA THAT CAN BE EXPLOITED TO GO
AFTER NETWORKS AND LEADERSHIP
DOWN THE ROAD.
>> Ifill: DO YOU AGREE VALI
NASR?
>> I AGREE.
I THINK I.S.I.S.'S POWER IN THE
REGION COMES FROM ITS ABILITY TO
SHOW IT'S A VIABLE FORCE, THAT
IT CAN CAPTURE TERRITORY, STAND
UP TO THE U.S. AND IT'S THE
ONLY, IF YOU WILL, SUNNI FORCE
CAPABLE OF TAKING ON BAGHDAD AND
TEHRAN AND ALL OF THIS IS
REINFORCED IN RAMADI.
THE FACT THEY LOST THE LEADER
MEANS HE HAS BEEN MARTYRED.
THAT'S EXPECTED IN WAR AND I
THINK THE FACT THEY WERE ABLE TO
CAPTURE RAMADI RIGHT AFTER THE
DEATH OF THAT LEADER.
>> Ifill: I'M ALSO CURIOUS
ABOUT WHETHER YOU THINK THAT THE
U.S. COULD BE DOING MORE OR
WHETHER THIS IS SOMETHING -- AND
PERHAPS TO THE EXTENT OF
ACTUALLY OVERTLY COLLABORATING
WITH IRAN.
>> WELL, IF OUR GOAL IS TO
DEFEAT I.S.I.S. IN THE VERY
SHORT RUN, IT CANNOT BE DONE
THROUGH IRAQI SECURITY FORCES.
BEING ABLE TO STAND UP AND FIGHT
I.S.I.S. WILL TAKE TIME.
SO EITHER THE U.S. HAS TO DO
MORE OF THE FIGHTING OR MUCH
MORE OVERTLY AND EXPLICITLY
COLLABORATE WITH THE SHIA
MILITIAS BACKED BY IRAN WHO ARE
PROVEN TO BE THE MORE EFFECTIVE
FORCE FIGHTING I.S.I.S.
>> Ifill: IS THAT A NONSTARTER
COLLABORATING EVEN IN A SUBTLE
FASHION WITH IRAN?
>> I THINK IN MOBILE LIFE MORE
SUNNI ARAB DEASSISTANCE NOT
THOSE JUST KEY TO SUPPORT
I.S.I.S. ANYWAY, AND I THINK IT
WILL PUT AT RISK OUR INFLUENCE
AND AN INDEPENDENT IRAQ DOWN THE
ROAD.
IT THREATENS TO MAKE IRAQ MORE
OF A CLIENT STATE OF TEHRAN IF
WE ARE NOT VERY CAREFUL ABOUT
HOW IRANIAN INFLUENCE WITH THESE
POPULAR MOBILIZATION UNITS AND
SHIA MILITIAS IS CALIBRATED.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU AND
STICKING WITH YOU, COLONEL
HARVEY, HOW STRONG IS THE
POLITICAL SUPPORT ON THE GROUND
NOR ACECIES WHICH MAKES IT MAYBE
A LITTLE MORE DIFFICULT TO TAKE
ON?
>> I DON'T THINK ANYONE IS
CERTAIN ABOUT HOW STRONG THE
POLITICAL SUPPORT IS.
WHAT'S CLEAR IS THERE IS REAL
FRUSTRATION AND STILL ANGER WITH
BAGHDAD.
KEEP IN MIND THAT RAMADI HAS
BEEN UNDER PRESSURE FROM
I.S.I.S. FOR 16 MONTHS AND THEY
HAVE BEEN ASKING FOR HELP, THE
TRIBAL LEADERS HAVE BEEN ASKING
FOR HELP, THE I.S.F., THE IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES WERE ASKING FOR
REINFORCEMENTS AND SUPPORT
CONTINUOUSLY OVER THIS TIME AND
IT WAS NOT FORTHCOMING FROM
BAGHDAD.
THAT CREATES ANIMOSITY TOWARD
BAGHDAD TAPPED INTO THROUGHOUT
THE SUNNI REGION.
>> Ifill: WE HEAR WHAT'S
HAPPENED IN TIKRIT, RAY MADE,
MOSUL, KOBANI AND FEELS LIKE A
FEW STEPS FORWARD AND SEVERAL
STEPS BACK AND WEATHER RIGHT
WHERE WE STARTED.
AM I WRONG IN THAT READING OR IS
THERE SOMETHING ELSE WE'RE DOING
WRONG THAT MEANS WE CANNOT MAKE
PERMANENT PROGRESS?
>> Ifill: WPROGRESS?
WE CANNOT MAKE PERMANENT
PROGRESS BY WHAT WE HAVE ON THE
GROUND.
THE IRAQI SECURITY FORCES CANNOT
DEFEAT I.S.I.S.
THEY CAN PUSH THEM OUT OF ONE
TOWN AND CITY AND I.S.I.S. MOVES
SOMEWHERE ELSE.
WHAT IS REQUIRED IS DENYING THE
ENTIRE TERRITORY OF IRAQ TO
I.S.I.S. AND BEING ABLE TO PUSH
I.S.I.S. OUT OF ALL THE
TERRITORY IT HOLDS WITHOUT
ENGAGE IT TO MOVE INTO ANOTHER
TERRITORY.
IRAQI SECURITY FORCES THAN NOT
DO THAT.
EVEN THE SHIA MILITIA BY
THEMSELVES CANNOT DO THAT IN THE
SHORT RUN.
IN THE LONGER RUN, THE U.S. HAS
TO INVEST IN BUILDING UP IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES TO BE ABLE TO
CONTROL IRAQ.
BUT IN THE SHORT RUN THERE IS NO
IMMEDIATE SOLUTION TO THIS SO
WE'RE PLAYING A GAME OF ROCK AND
ROLL WITH I.S.I.S.
HIT THEM IN TIKRIT, THEY MOVE TO
RAMADI.
HIT THEM IN RAMADI, THEY MOVE
SOMEWHERE ELSE.
AT ANY RATE, THE IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES NOW ARE NOT A STRONG
OPTION.
IF OUR GOAL IS TO DEFEAT
I.S.I.S., YOU HAVE TO SEE WHAT
YOU HAVE TO WORK WITH AND WHAT
YOU HAVE TO WORK WITH IS THE
SHIA MILITIAS.
>> Ifill: DEREK HARVEY, DOES
THAT MEAN I.S.I.S. HAS TO BE
TREATED AS A LONG-TERM ENEMY.
>> CLEARLY HAS TO BE TREATED AS
A LONG-TERM ENEMY, BUT I THINK
WE'RE OVERESTIMATING THE
CAPABILITY OF FIGHTING STRENGTH
OF THE POPULAR MOBILIZATION
UNITS OF THE SHIA MILITIAS.
THEY ARE NOT THAT GOOD AND
THEY'VE DEMONSTRATED THAT AT THE
OUTSECURITIES OF TIKRIT AND IN
OTHER PLACES WHEN THEY
OVERWHELMINGLY OVERMATCH SUNNI
FIGHTERS IN A SMALL TOWN OR NOT
A BUILT-UP AREA, THEY DO WELL.
BUT IN STREET FIGHTING, URBAN
FIGHTING AGAINST AN ORGANIZED
OFFENSE, THEY'VE DEMONSTRATED
THEY ARE NOT GOOD.
>> Ifill: DEREK HARVEY OF
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH FLORIDA AND
VALI NASR OF FORMER STATE
DEPARTMENT SENIOJOHN HOPKINS SCL
STUDIES.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: MANY OF THE IMAGES
THAT FIRST CALLED THE NATION'S
ATTENTION TO THE PROTESTS IN
FERGUSON, MISSOURI, LAST SUMMER
WERE ONES LIKE THESE-- VIDEO OF
THE LOCAL POLICE FORCE
RESPONDING IN STRENGTH AND
SOMETIMES RESEMBLING A SMALL
ARMY, INCLUDING, OFFICERS CLAD
IN MILITARY GEAR, USING TEAR
GAS, AND POINTING RIFLES AT THE
CROWDS.
THE CLASHES IN BALTIMORE AND NEW
YORK CITY HAVE REINFORCED THOSE
IMAGES AS WELL.
MUCH OF THIS EQUIPMENT WAS MADE
AVAILABLE TO LOCAL POLICE
DEPARTMENTS IN THE YEARS AFTER
THE 9/11 ATTACKS.
BUT TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCED A BAN ON THE SALE OR
TRANSFER OF CERTAIN MILITARY-
STYLE GEAR TO LOCAL POLICE,
INCLUDING: TRACKED ARMORED
VEHICLES, GRENADE LAUNCHERS, AND
FIREARMS OF .50-CALIBER OR
HIGHER.
HE SPOKE IN CAMDEN, NEW JERSEY.
>> WE'VE SEEN HOW MILITARIZED
GEAR CAN SOMETIMES GIVE PEOPLE A
FEELING LIKE THERE IS AN
OCCUPYING FORCE AS OPPOSED TO A
FORCE THAT'S PART OF THE
COMMUNITY THAT'S PROTECTING AND
SERVING THEM, IT CAN ALIENATE
AND INTIMIDATE LOCAL RESIDENTS
AND SEND THE WRONG MESSAGE.
SO WE'RE GOING TO PROHIBIT SOME
EQUIPMENT MADE FOR THE
BATTLEFIELDS THAT IS NOT
APPROPRIATE FOR LOCAL POLICE
DEPARTMENTS.
>> Woodruff: A CLOSER LOOK AT
WHAT'S BEHIND THIS DECISION, AND
ITS POTENTIAL IMPACT.
PHILADELPHIA POLICE CHIEF
CHARLES RAMSEY IS THE CO-CHAIR
OF THE PRESIDENT'S TASK FORCE ON
POLICING, WHICH HAS BEEN WORKING
ON THESE ISSUES.
AND, RICHARD BEARY IS THE
PRESIDENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF POLICE CHIEFS.
HE'S THE FORMER POLICE CHIEF OF
THE CITY OF LAKE MARY, FLORIDA,
AND NOW CHIEF OF POLICE FOR THE
UNIVERSITY OF CENTRAL FLORIDA.
AND, GENTLEMEN, WE THANK YOU
BOTH.
CHIEF RAMSEY, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
WHAT THE PRESIDENT DID TODAY WAS
ONE OF REALLY PICKING UP ON ONE
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
TASK FORCE YOU LED, HAVE BEEN
LEADING, THE RECOMMENDATIONS YOU
MADE.
WHY IS THIS NECESSARY?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S CLEARLY
NECESSARY THAT WE BE ABLE TO ASK
POLICE TO JUSTIFY ANY EQUIPMENT
THAT WE RECEIVE NOT JUST FROM
THE MILITARY BUT ALSO USING
FEDERAL GRANTS TO GET SOME OF
THE EQUIPMENT.
OBVIOUSLY, WE NEED A BROAD RANGE
OF EQUIPMENT.
POLICE NEED -- POLICE HANDLE
EVERYTHING FROM MISSING
CHILDRENOTO ACTIVE SHOOTERS.
THE EQUIPMENT YOU NEED TO
RESPOND VARIES A GREAT DEAL.
BUT SOME MILITARY EQUIPMENT IS
MORE APPROPRIATE FOR THE FIELD
OF BATTLE, NOT THE URBAN STREETS
OF OUR CITIES.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF BEARY, DO
YOU AGREE THIS IS THE THING TO
DO TO BAN SOME KINDS OF MILITARY
EQUIPMENT?
>> I THINK EVERYBODY IS LOOKING
FOR A BALANCE.
WE AT THE INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF CHIEFS OF POLICE
UNDERSTAND WE HAVE TO HAVE THE
SUPPORT OF THE COMMUNITY BUT, AT
THE SAME TIME, AS CHIEF RAMSEY
SAYS, LAW ENFORCEMENT IS DEALING
WITH LOTS OF NEW THREATS.
20 YEARS AGO, WHOEVER HEARD OF
AN ACTIVE SHOOTER?
NOW WE HEAR ABOUT IT ALL THE
TIME.
SO WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
BALANCE THE NEEDS TO HAV OF THEC
AND THE SAFETY OF THE OFFICERS
AND THOSE SWORN TO PROTECT THE
PUBLIC.
THAT'S WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO
HERE.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF RAMSEY,
WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT
ACHIEVING THE BALANCE AND HOW
MUCH HAS TO DO WITH EQUIPMENT
AND HOW MUCH HAS TO DO WITH THE
TRAINING OF THE POLICE
THEMSELVES, THE CULTURE THAT
THEY WORK IN?
>> WELL, I THINK MOST OF IT HAS
TO DO WITH TRAINING, BUT
PROBABLY THE MOST IMPORTANT
ASPECT OF THIS IS POLICY.
AT WHAT POINT IN TIME IS IT
PROPERTY TO DEPLOY CERTAIN TYPES
OF EQUIPMENT, AND THERE ARE NEED
TO BE STANDARDS AND POLICIES IN
PLACE TO GUIDE TOUSERS SO THEY
HAVE CLEAR DIRECTION, AND I
THINK THAT WE HAVE SEEN SOME
INSTANCES WHERE CERTAIN TYPES OF
EQUIPMENT WERE DEPLOYED, IN MY
OPINION, AT A POINT IN TIME WHEN
IT WASN'T REALLY NECESSARY, AND
THAT'S WHAT CREATES A LOT OF THE
PROBLEMS.
SO IT'S TRAINING, IT'S POLICY,
IT'S ALL OF THOSE THINGS
COMBINED THAT I THINK WE NEED TO
MAKE SURE ARE IN PLACE, AND I
THINK THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS
RIGHT IN SEEING TO IT THAT WE DO
HAVE THOSE THINGS IN PLACE
BEFORE PROVIDING THAT KIND OF
EQUIPMENT TO AN AGENCY.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF RAMSY,
WHAT'S AN EXAMPLE OF THE TIME
AND PLACE WHEN THE WRONG THING
WAS USED?
>> WELL, WHEN YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT MASS DEMONSTRATIONS,
DEPENDING ON THE CROWD, AND
WE'RE NOT TALKING ABOUT ALL-OUT
RIOTS LIKE WE SAW THE FIRST DAY
IN BALTIMORE, WHEN THINGS REALLY
SPIRALED OUT OF CONTROL, AND
EVEN LATER IN FERGUSON, THINGS
SPIRALED OUT OF CONTROL.
BUT WHEN IT FIRST STARTED, I
KNOW THAT I WAS IN
WASHINGTON, D.C. AND NOW
PHILADELPHIA, WE TRY TO START
OFF WITHOUT USING CERTAIN TYPES
OF EQUIPMENT.
WE HAVE THEM AVAILABLE, BUT IT'S
CERTAINLY OUT OF SIGHT.
WE DON'T WANT TO INCITE A CROWD.
SO I THINK IT'S WAY YOU
DEPLOYED, DEPENDING ON WHAT
YOU'RE DEALING, WITH PEOPLE HAVE
A RIGHT TO PROTEST, AND IF YOU
SHOW UP WITH RIOT GEAR, HEAVY
ARMORED VEHICLES AND SO FORTH
WHEN PEOPLE ARE JUST SIMPLY OUT
PEACEFULLY DEMONSTRATING, YOU'RE
GOING TO WIND UP WITH A RIOT,
MORE THAN LIKELY.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF BEARY, HOW
DO YOU STRIKE THE RIGHT BALANCE
AND HOW MUCH I IS THE EQUIPMENT
AND HOW MUCH IS THE TRAINING AND
APPROACH AND CULTURE OF THE
POLICE FORCE?
>> WELL, A COUPLE OF IMPORTANT
THINGS COME TO LIGHT.
NUMBER ONE, WHAT WE KNOW IS 90%
OF WHAT LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES
ACROSS THIS COUNTRY HAVE
RECEIVED FROM THE MILITARY HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH TANKS AND
GUNS AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
THE MAJORITY OF THE EQUIPMENT
THAT WE HAVE RECEIVED ARE
RADIOS, EQUIPMENT, THINGS THAT
HELP US DO OUR JOB IN THE
COMMUNITY.
SO I THINK WE NEED TO MAKE SURE
WE UNDERSTAND THAT.
SECONDLY, TRAINING IS ABSOLUTELY
AN ESSENTIAL PART OF RESPONDING
TO ANY TYPE OF SITUATION.
SO I AGREE WITH CHIEF RAMSEY.
IT'S ABOUT TRAINING, POLICY, AND
ALSO ABOUT HAVING THAT JUST IN
CASE YOU NEED IT BECAUSE YOU
JUST DON'T KNOW WHEN A CROWD IS
GOING TO GO BAD.
A PERFECT EXAMPLE WAS IN WACO,
TEXAS YESTERDAY.
THEY DIDN'T EXPECT THE SHOOTOUT
THEY HAD THERE.
SO IT'S A REAL COMBINATION, AND
THAT'S THE DELICATE BALANCE WITH
TRYING TO BE A POLICE CHIEF IN
THIS COUNTRY IS TO MAKE SURE YOU
HAVE YOUR PEOPLE PREPARED, HAVE
THE EQUIPMENT YOU NEED, AT THE
SAME TIME, NOT TRYING TO COME
OFF LIKE YOU'RE TRYING TO INTIM
AT A TIME THE COMMUNITY YOU
SERVE.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF RAMSEY, I
WOULD LIKE YOU TO RESPOND TO
THAT AND ALSO ADDRESS -- I MEAN,
HOW MUCH OF A PROBLEM DO WE HAVE
IN THIS COUNTRY RIGHT NOW
BETWEEN POLICE AND COMMUNITIES
WHO FEEL THEY ARE JUST NOT
UNDERSTOOD AND NOT RESPECTED BY
THE POLICE?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, IT DEPENDS ON
THE CITY, THE RELATIONSHIP THAT
POLICE AND COMMUNITY HAVE.
OBVIOUSLY, THERE ARE SOME AREAS
AND POCKETS IN OUR CITY WHERE
RELATIONSHIPS ARE STRAINED.
THAT'S NOT NEW.
I STARTED POLICING IN 1968 IN
CHICAGO AND WE HAD AREAS OF OUR
CITY WHERE NO ONE WOULD TALK TO
YOU, PROVIDE INFORMATION AND SO
FORTH.
I MEAN, THERE WAS TENSION
BETWEEN POLICE AND COMMUNITY.
NOW, WE'VE ENGAGED IN COMMUNITY
POLICING FOR THE LAST THREE
DECADES AT LEAST, AND I THINK
WE'VE DONE A VERY, VERY GOOD JOB
OF ESTABLISHING RELATIONSHIPS
AND ALSO REDUCING CRIME, BUT WE
HAVE LEFT SOME COMMUNITY BEHIND.
THERE STILL REMAINS SOME TENSION
AND WE NEED TO BE SURE WE BUILD
BRIDGES, THAT WE CLOSE THE GAPS
WITH THOSE COMMUNITIES AS WELL,
AND THEY TEND TO BE COMMUNITIES
OF COLOR AND COMMUNITIES THAT
ARE CHALLENGED IN MANY WAYS WITH
POVERTY, LACK OF EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES OF QUALITY AND
THINGS OF THAT NATURE.
SO WE'VE GOT A LOT OF WORK AHEAD
OF US.
BUT THE COMMUNITY HAS TO WORK
ALONGSIDE US.
THIS ISN'T JUST A POLICE ISSUE.
IT TAKES THE COMMUNITY ALSO
REACHING OUT TO US AS WE REACH
OUT TO THEM.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF BEARY, HOW
MUCH OF THE COUNTRY HAS THIS
PROBLEM WE'RE TALKING ABOUT AND
TO WHAT EXTENT DO YOU THINK
BANNING THESE MILITARISTIC-STYLE
PIECES OF EQUIPMENT WILL MAKE A
DIFFERENCE?
>> WELL, I DON'T THINK WHAT THE
GOVERNMENT HAS BANNED WILL HAVE
THAT BIG OF AN IMPACT.
WHAT OUR CONCERN IS, IS REALLY
THE STUFF THAT THEY HAVE --
EQUIPMENT THAT THEY HAVE LIMITED
AND WE'RE WAITING TO SEE HOW THE
RULES ROLL OUT, HOW WE JUSTIFY
THE USE AND THINGS OF THAT
NATURE.
CERTAINLY, WHEN IT COMES TO
COMMUNITY POLICING, THAT IS A
KEY PART OF THE SOLUTION.
HOWEVER, WE KNOW THERE ARE A LOT
OF ISSUES GOING ON IN OUR
COMMUNITIES FROM POVERTY TO
MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES.
THERE ARE A HOST OF ISSUES GOING
ON AND THE I.A.C.P. FOR OVER 20
YEARS CALLED FOR A NATIONAL
SUMMIT ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE, THE
ENTIRE SYSTEM, AND WE'RE HOPING
ALL THE THINGS COMBINED WILL
LEAD TO THE COMMISSION TO TAKE A
LOOK AT THE WHOLE SYSTEM AND HOW
TO BETTER HANDLE THE DELIVERY OF
SERVICE TO OUR COMMUNITIES AND
TREAT OUR PEOPLE AND MEN AND
WOMEN WHO WORK FOR US AND THE
SOURCES WITH RESPECT.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF WORK AHEAD.
I THINK IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO
NOTE THERE ARE A LOT OF
COMMUNITIES ACROSS THIS COUNTRY
WHO ARE DOING A GREAT JOB AND
LAW ENFORCEMENT DOING A GREAT
JOB.
A REUTERS POLL WAS DONE IN
JANUARY THIS YEAR AND
THREE-QUARTERS OF THE PEOPLE WHO
RESPONDED SAID THEY HAVE
CONFIDENCE IN THEIR LOCAL POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF GED THINGS
BEING DONE ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
WE JUST NEED TO CONTINUE TO
ENHANCE THAT AND DELIVER THE
SERVICES OUR COMMUNITY EXPECT.
>> Woodruff: CHIEF BEARY,
PRESIDENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF POLICE CHIEFS AND
CHIEF RAMSEY OF PHILADELPHIA.
WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: 50 YEARS AGO TODAY,
PRESIDENT LYNDON JOHNSON
ANNOUNCED THE CREATION OF HEAD
START, THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM
DESIGNED TO SUPPORT LOW-INCOME
CHILDREN AND FAMILIES.
IN OUR LATEST AMERICAN GRADUATE
REPORT, THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL
BROWN HAS THE STORY OF HOW IT'S
CHANGED THE LIVES OF MILLIONS OF
CHILDREN.
THAT'S PART OF A PUBLIC MEDIA
INITIATIVE FUNDED BY THE
CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING.
>> Reporter: LISETTE STEINWALD'S
PRE-SCHOOL CLASS IN SILVER
SPRING, MARYLAND.
THE THEME OF WHAT IT TAKES TO
MAKE A SALAD CAN BE FOUND IN A
VARIETY OF ACTIVITIES THROUGHOUT
THE DAY, FROM READING, TO A
LITTLE SHOW AND TELL.
THE FOUR AND FIVE YEAR-OLDS SHE
TEACHES IN THE HEAD START
PROGRAM AT MONTGOMERY KNOLLS
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL SPEND ABOUT
THREE-AND-A-HALF HOURS WITH HER
EVERY DAY DURING THE SCHOOL
YEAR.
>> CURVE IT AROUND AND SLIDE TO
THE RIGHT TO MAKE A NUMBER TWO.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE LEARNING
SKILLS DESIGNED TO EASE THE
TRANSITION TO KINDERGARTEN, AND
ARE FOLLOWING IN THE FOOTSTEPS
OF ABOUT 30 MILLION CHILDREN WHO
HAVE GONE THROUGH THE PROGRAM IN
THE UNITED STATES OVER THE PAST
FIVE DECADES.
HEAD START GOT ITS START IN THE
SUMMER OF 1965,
AS ONE SALVO IN PRESIDENT LYNDON
JOHNSON'S WAR ON POVERTY.
THE EARLY EDUCATION PROGRAM FOR
LOW-INCOME CHILDREN SUPPORTED
THEIR SOCIAL, EMOTIONAL AND
PHYSICAL NEEDS AND GOT THEM
READY FOR ELEMENTARY SCHOOL.
IT DREW HIGH-PROFILE SUPPORTERS,
INCLUDING THE PRESIDENT'S WIFE,
LADY BIRD JOHNSON...
AND ACTOR GREGORY PECK.
>> SADLY, THERE ARE LITTLE
CHILDREN WHO ARE ALREADY HEADED
FOR LIVES OF FRUSTRATION AND
MISERY.
NO ONE EVER READ THEM A STORY,
TAUGHT THEM A NURSERY RHYME OR
SHOWED THEM ABOUT LETTERS,
COLORS AND NUMBERS.
WHEN THEY START SCHOOL, THEY'LL
BE SO FAR BEHIND THE OTHERS THEY
MAY NEVER CATCH UP.
>> IN 1965 I WAS SITTING ON THE
PORCH OF OUR SHACK IN AMES,
TEXAS WITH MY MOTHER AND A WOMAN
APPROACHED THE HOUSE.
SHE INTRODUCED HERSELF AND TOLD
MY MOTHER SHE REPRESENTED A NEW
PROGRAM CALLED HEAD START.
>> Reporter: DARREN WALKER'S
MOTHER SIGNED HIM UP IN THE
PROGRAM'S INAUGURAL YEAR, AND HE
RECENTLY SHARED HIS STORY AT A
GATHERING OF SUPPORTERS AND
ALUMNI FROM AROUND THE COUNTRY
HOSTED BY THE NATIONAL HEAD
START ASSOCIATION.
IT LET ME BEGIN TO IMAGINE TO
THINK ABOUT THE WORLD OUTSIDE OF
MY ENVIRONMENT AND TO THINK
CREATIVELY ABOUT WHAT MY LIFE
MIGHT BE.
>> Reporter: TODAY WALKER IS
PRESIDENT OF THE FORD
FOUNDATION, THE NATION'S SECOND
LARGEST PHILANTHROPIC GROUP,
WHICH IS A FUNDER OF THE
NEWSHOUR.
IN HONOR OF HEAD START'S 50th
ANNIVERSARY, THE ORGANIZATION IS
PAYING FOR NEW RESEARCH ON EARLY
BRAIN DEVELOPMENT IN AN EFFORT
TO IMPROVE OUTCOMES.
DARREN WALKER SAYS THE
FOUNDATION HAS COME FULL-CIRCLE
SINCE IT SUPPORTED RESEARCH IN
THE 1960's THAT LEAD TO THE
CREATION OF HEAD START IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
>> WHAT WE WERE INTERESTED IN AT
FORD WAS HOW WE COULD SCALE
ACROSS AMERICA PROGRAM THAT
COULD CREATE AN EDUCATIONAL
REVOLUTION THAT WOULD BUILD A
NEW SOCIAL MOBILITY ESCALATOR.
>> ISABEL DO YOU HAVE A
TOOTHBRUSH AT HOME?
NO TOOTHBRUSH.
>> THE EVIDENCE IS THAT IT DID
SOME GOOD WHEN IT WAS FIRST
INTRODUCED FOR SOME VERY POOR
COUNTIES IN THE SOUTH.
IT'S A DIFFERENT DAY.
>> Reporter: RUSS WHITEHURST IS
A SENIOR FELLOW AT THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTION AND HAS STUDIED PRE-
SCHOOL PROGRAMS EXTENSIVELY.
HE SAYS EVEN THOUGH IT'S AN
ICONIC PROGRAM, EVIDENCE HAS
REVEALED THAT HEAD START'S LONG-
TERM OUTCOMES ARE QUESTIONABLE.
WHITEHURST POINTS TO A 2010
STUDY BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, AND
THE 2014 FOLLOW-UP REPORT WHICH
FOUND ALMOST NO EVIDENCE OF
LASTING IMPACTS FOR HEAD START
CHILDREN BEYOND THE THIRD GRADE.
>> THAT IS THEY WERE NOT BETTER
READERS, THEY WERE NOT DOING
MATH BETTER, THEY DID NOT HAVE
BETTER SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT.
THEY DID NOT HAVE BETTER HEALTH
OUTCOMES.
>> Reporter: BUT THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL HEAD
START ASSOCIATION, YASMINA
VINCI, SAYS OTHER FACTORS SHOULD
BE TAKEN INTO CONSIDERATION WHEN
LOOKING AT THAT RESEARCH.
>> EVEN WHEN YOU'RE VACCINATED
VACCINATIONS DO NOT LAST
FOREVER.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE A BOOSTER.
WHEN OUR KIDS DON'T GO TO
SCHOOLS THAT ARE NOT WELL FUNDED
AND WELL RUN OR READY FOR THEM
THEY CERTAINLY LOSE SOME OF
THEIR ADVANTAGE.
>> Reporter: HOWEVER, EVEN THE
WHITE HOUSE HAS ACKNOWLEDGED
HEAD START PROGRAMS HAVEN'T
ALWAYS BEEN PUSHED TO DO THEIR
BEST
>> IF A PROGRAM WASN'T PROVIDING
KIDS WITH QUALITY SERVICES,
THERE WAS NO INCENTIVE TO
IMPROVE.
>> Reporter: IN 2011, PRESIDENT
BARACK OBAMA EXPANDED
ACCOUNTABILITY REFORMS
INTRODUCED BY GEORGE W. BUSH,
AND THIS YEAR HAS APPROPRIATED
ABOUT $8 BILLION FOR HEAD START
SERVICES.
STILL, RUSS WHITEHURST SAYS THE
PROGRAM ISN'T MEETING THE NEEDS
OF MANY LOW-INCOME FAMILIES.
HE BELIEVES THEY WOULD BETTER
SERVED WITH VOUCHERS TO CHOOSE
THEIR OWN PRE-SCHOOLS,
ESPECIALLY SINCE MANY HEAD START
CENTERS ARE OPEN JUST A FEW
HOURS A DAY.
NUMBERS PROVING HEAD START'S
SUCCESS ARE HARD TO COME BY, BUT
THE PROGRAM'S SUPPORTERS SAY
THEY KNOW IT'S CHANGED MANY
LIVES.
>> WE SEE THE CHILDREN WHO ARE
NOW GRADUATING FROM HIGH SCHOOL
GETTING SCHOLARSHIPS, FULL
COLLEGE SCHOLARSHIPS, NOT
DROPPING OUT OF HIGH SCHOOL.
>> I REMEMBER THAT I STARTED TO
LEARN TO READ AND THAT I WOULD
READ TO MY MOTHER WHEN I CAME
HOME AND SHE WAS SO PROUD OF ME.
AND IT WAS ONE THOSE MOMENTS
THAT I LEARNED IF I DID WELL IN
SCHOOL MY MOTHER WOULD BE PROUD
OF ME.
>> Reporter: BACK IN MARYLAND,
LISETTE STEINWALD'S CLASS
CONTINUES THEIR EXPLORATION OF
SALAD, TASTE-TESTING A VARIETY
OF INGREDIENTS.
>> RAISE YOUR HAND IF YOU LIKE
LETTUCE MORE THAN CARROTS.
ONE, TWO, THREE FOUR... AND A
HALF.
>> Reporter: AND AT THE END OF
THE DAY, ZYRIANA BARAZARTE IS
HAPPY TO SHARE ALL THE THINGS
SHE LEARNED IN HER MORNING AT
HEAD START.
>> I LEARNED HOW TO MAKE SALAD,
HOW TO READ, AND HOW TO SING
SONGS.
>> Reporter: ZYRIANA'S MOTHER,
ZOILA BARAZARTE, WHO IS DEAF,
SAYS THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN GOOD
FOR HER DAUGHTER.
>> SHE'S LEARNING A LOT OF
VOCABULARY FROM THE TEACHER,
LISTENING SKILLS, SHE'S LEARNING
TO SHARE.
>> Reporter: JUST A FEW OF THE
OUTCOMES HEAD START WAS
ORIGINALLY CREATED TO NURTURE.
I'M APRIL BROWN FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR IN SILVER SPRING,
MARYLAND.
>> Woodruff: NOW, TO OUR SERIES
OF INTERVIEWS WITH THE MEN AND
WOMEN RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT IN
2016.
TONIGHT, SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS
OF VERMONT, AN INDEPENDENT
SEEKING THE DEMOCRATIC
NOMINATION.
WELCOME TO THE "NewsHour",
SENATOR SANDERS.
>> GREAT TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU ARE AN
INDEPENDENT.
YOU CALL YOURSELF A DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST.
HOW IS THAT DIFFERENT FROM BEING
A DEMOCRAT?
>> WELL, I HAVE BEEN IN THE
DEMOCRATIC CAUCUS IN THE SENATE
FOR OVER 24 YEARS BUT AS AN
INDEPENDENT MY VIEWS, IN FACT,
ARE A LITTLE DIFFERENT THAN MANY
OF MY DEMOCRATIC COLLEAGUES.
I WORRY VERY MUCH THAT WE HAVE A
BILLIONAIRE CLASS NOW WHICH HAS
ENORMOUS POWER NOT ONLY OVER OUR
ECONOMY BUT OVER OUR POLITICAL
SYSTEM AS WELL AS A RESULT OF
CITIZENS UNITED SUPREME COURT
DECISION.
SO MY OWN VIEW IS THAT WE HAVE
GOT TO BE VERY, VERY BOLD IN
TAKING ON BIG MONEY AND CREATING
A SITUATION WHERE GOVERNMENT
BEGINS TO WORK FOR THE MIDDLE
CLASS AND WORKING FAMILIES OF
OUR COUNTRY RATHER THAN JUST THE
WEALTHY AND THE POWERFUL.
>> Woodruff: SO THAT'S THE
MAIN DIFFERENCE YOU WOULD MAKE.
WHY ARE YOU RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT?
>> JUDY, I'M RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT BECAUSE,IN MY VIEW,
OUR COUNTRY FACES MORE SERIOUS
PROBLEMS THAN AT ANY TIME SINCE
THE GREAT DEPRESSION, AND IF YOU
THROW IN THE PLANETARY CRISIS OF
CLIMATE CHANGE, IT MAY WELL BE
THAT THE PROBLEMS ARE GETTING
MORE SEVERE.
LOOK, FOR THE LAST 30 YEARS, THE
GREAT MIDDLE CLASS OF THIS
COUNTRY HAS BEEN DISAPPEARING.
IMMEDIATE I CAN'T BE FAMILY
INCOME TODAY IS SIGNIFICANTLY
LESS THAN 1999.
MILLIONS ARE WORKING LONGER
HOURS FOR LOWER WAGES.
AT THE SAME TIME, WE HAVE SEEN A
HUGE SHIFT OF WEALTH TO THE TOP
1/10 OF 1%.
SO TODAY, 99% OF ALL INCOME IS
GOING TO THE TOP 1%.
THE TOP ONE-TENTH OF 1% OWNS
ALMOST AS MUCH WEALTH AS THE
BOTTOM 99%.
THAT SUN SUSTAINABLE.
>> Woodruff: YOU TALKED ABOUT
RAISING THE CAPITAL GAINS RATE
AND THE TAX ON DIVIDENDS FOR THE
TOP 2%.
IN FACT, YOU TALK ABOUT, I
THINK, NEARLY DOUBLING IT.
CRITICS SAY THAT IS GOING TO PUT
A BIG DAMPER ON JOB CREATION AND
THE GROWTH OF THIS ECONOMY.
>> WELL, I KNOW.
CRITICS ARE OFTEN PAID BY LARGE
CORPORATIONS OR CORPORATE THINK
TANKS.
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS RIGHT
NOW IN AMERICA WE'RE LOSING
ABOUT $100 BILLION EVERY SINGLE
YEAR BECAUSE VERY PROFITABLE
CORPORATIONS ARE STASHING MONEY
IN THE CAYMAN ISLANDS AND OTHER
TAX HAVENS.
THAT HAS TO END.
SECOND OFF, WE HAVE HEDGE FUND
MANAGERS, GUYS MAKING MANY
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS A YEAR ARE
PAYING AN EFFECTIVE TAX RATE
LOWER THAN NURSES OR SCHOOL
TEACHERS ARE PAYING.
AND WARREN BUFFET MAKES THE
POINT HIS EFFECTIVE TAX RATE AS
A MULTI-BILLIONAIRE IS LOWER
THAN HIS SECRETARY'S.
THAT'S GOT TO END.
THEY HAVE TO PAY THEIR FAIR
SHARE OF TAXES.
>> Woodruff: YOU HAVE BEEN
CRITICAL OF THE TRADE BILL
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS VIGOROUSLY
PUSHING.
HILLARY CLINTON, YOUR RIVAL, HAS
NOT YET TAKE AN POSITION ON
THIS.
JUST TODAY, CBS NEWS REGARDING
THE SHE HAS TAKEN 2. $2.5 MILLIN
IN SPEAKING FEES FROM
ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE PROMOTING
THIS TRADE BILL.
IS THAT A PROBLEM?
>> SURE, IT'S A PROBLEM.
THE PROBLEM THAT WE HAVE NOW IS
THAT OUR POLITICAL SYSTEM IS
INCREASINGLY DOMINATED BY OUR
BILLIONAIRE CLASS AND SUPER PACS
WHO HAVE UNBELIEVABLE INFLUENCE
OVER WHAT GOES ON POLITICALLY.
IT IS A HUGE PROBLEM.
BUT IN TERMS OF THIS TRADE
AGREEMENT, IN MY VIEW, THE
TRANCE ATLANTIC PARTNERSHIP HAVE
TO DO WITH TRADE AGREEMENTS WITH
OTHER COUNTRIES AND CONTRIBUTE
TO THE FAC THAT WE HAVE LOST
ALMOST 60,000 FACTORIES SINCE
2001 AND MILLIONS OF
DECENT-PAYING JOBS, AND I THINK
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH.
WE HAVE GOT TO REBUILD OUR
MANUFACTURING BASE, NOT SEND UT
TO CHINA OR OTHER COUNTRIES.
>> Woodruff: DOES IT MATTER --
WE SAID SECRETARY CLINTON HAS
NOT TAKEN A POSITION.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN IF SHE DOESN'T
TAKE A POSITION ON THIS BEFORE
THE CONGRESS VOTES ON IT.
>> I THINK THAT'S A VERY FAIR
QUESTION.
I THINK THE AMERICAN PEOPLE WILL
HAVE TO DECIDE.
IF YOU ARE ASKING ME WHY IT IS
THAT THE MIDDLE CLASS THE
DISAPPEARING AND YOU'RE SEEING
MORE INCOME AND WEALTH
INEQUALITY THAN ANY TIME SINCE
THE 1920s, TRADE IS A VERY
IMPORTANT FACTOR.
NOT THE ONLY REASON.
IT IS HARD FOR ME TO UNDERSTAND
ANY SERIOUS CANDIDATE FOR
PRESIDENT CAN DUCK THE ISSUE.
YOU CAN'T.
YOU CAN BE FOR IT OR AGAINST IT,
BUT IT IS HOTTY DEBATED NOW IN
CONGRESS.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE A POSITION ON
IT.
>> Woodruff: IN THIS CASE, YOU
ARE GOING UP AGAINST SOMEBODY
WHO IS A POLITICAL JOGGERNAUT IN
SECRETARY CLINTON.
WHY IS THAT?
>> I HAVE STOOD UP AND FOUGHT
ALL MY LIFE FOR AMERICAN WORK
FAMILIES.
I'VE TAKEN ON BIG ESTABLISHMENT,
WHETHER KOCH BROTHERS, WREATH,
THE BREAKUP OF THE LACKEST
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE
COUNTRY.
I'VE TAKEN ON THE DRUG
COMPANIES, THE INSURANCE
COMPANIES, I BELIEVE WE SHOULD
MOVE TO A MEDICARE SYSTEM
SIMILAR TO WHAT OTHER COUNTRIES
HAVE.
I THINK PEOPLE UNDERSTAND
ESTABLISHMENT POLITICS IS NO
LONGER WORKING.
WE NEED MASS MOVEMENT, MILLIONS
OF PEOPLE TO STAND UP AND SAY
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH.
THIS GREAT COUNTRY BELONGS TO
ALL OF US AND NOT JUST A HANDFUL
OF BILLIONAIRES.
IF PEOPLE BELIEVE THAT, I'LL WIN
THIS ELECTION.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE SAYING SHE
CAN'T DO THAT?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
>> Woodruff: I.S.I.S. JUST
ACHIEVED A MAJOR VICTORY IN IRAQ
IN TAKING OVER RAMADI OVER THE
WEEKEND.
YOU HAVE SAID YOU DON'T THINK IS
U.S. SHOULD BE LEADING THE
CHARGE AGAINST I.S.I.S.
DOES THAT MEAN RAIDS LIKE THE
ONE THAT TOOK PLACE LAST WEEK
WHERE THE U.S. TOOK OUT ONE OF
THE TOP I.S.I.S. LEADERS AND THE
ONGOING AIR STRIKES IN SYRIA AND
IRAQ SHOULD NOT --
>> NO, I HAVE SUPPORTED THOSE
EFFORTS ON THE PART OF THE
PRESIDENT.
I VOTED AGAINST THE WAR IN IRAQ.
I THINK IF YOU GO BACK AND READ
WHAT I HAD TO SAY WAY BACK WHEN,
YOU KNOW, IT SPEAKS OF THE
DESTABLESSIZION WE'VE SEEN IN
THE MIDDLE EAST.
SO MY VIEW IS THE UNITED STATES
HAS TO PLAY AN ACTIVE ROLE IN
DEFEATING THIS BARBARIC
ORGANIZATION, BUT AT THE END OF
THE DAY IT'S GOING TO BE THE
MUSLIM COUNTRIES THEMSELVES
SUPPORTED BY THE UNITED STATES
AND OTHER WESTERN COUNTRIES THAT
WILL DEFEAT I.S.I.S. AND BRING
SOME DEGREE OF STABILITY INTO
THE MIDDLE EAST.
IT CANNOT BE AMERICAN TROOPS ON
THE GROUND.
I TELL YOU WHAT I WORRY ABOUT.
I THINK TOO MANY OF MY
REPUBLICAN FRIENDS ARE INTO
PERPETUAL WARFARE IN THE MIDDLE
EAST AND THAT SCARES ME.
>> Woodruff: THE RAID LAST
WEEK THAT TOOK OUT THE I.S.I.S.
LEADER --
>> AND I SUPPORTED THE
AIRSTRIKES.
BUT I DO NOT WANT TO SEE WARFARE
IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND AMER
THE MIDDLE EAST.
>> Woodruff: BERNIE SANDERS,
CANDIDATE FOR DEMOCRATIC
NOMINATION FOR PRESIDENT.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: NOW TO OUR WEEKLY
ANALYSIS OF THE POLITICS, AND
THE POLITICIANS, DRIVING THE
NATIONAL DEBATE.
IT'S POLITICS MONDAY, WITH AMY
WALTER OF THE "COOK POLITICAL
REPORT," AND TAMARA KEITH OF
NPR.
WE JUST LISTENED TO SENATOR
SANDERS JUST NOW.
TAMARA, WHAT DO WE THINK?
IS THERE ROOM ON THE STAGE FOR
AN ALTERNATIVE TO TO HILLARY
CLINTON, WHOSE NAME IS BERNIE
SANDERS?
>> A LOT OF DEMOCRATS WOULD LIKE
AN ALTERNATIVE.
DEMOCRATS ON THE WHOLE ARE
ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT TYPES, AT
LEAST SOME, ESPECIALLY THE KIND
WHO GET INVOLVED IN THE CAUCUSES
IN IOWA, AND DON'T REALLY WANT
TO BE TOLD, WELL, HERE'S YOUR
OPTION.
SO THERE ARE A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO
ARE FLIRTING WITH BERNIE
SANDERS, LIKE THE IDEA OF BERNIE
SANDERS.
THEY LIKE WHAT HE HAS TO SAY.
SO I THINK THAT THERE ARE A LOT
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE INTO THIS.
I DON'T EXACTLY SEE HIS PATH.
>> THERE'S THE PATH TO VICTORY
AND THE PATH ON MESSAGING.
HE WAS SAYING A LOT OF THINGS
ABOUT WE HAVE BEEN HEARING FROM
HILLARY CLINTON A LOT.
>> Ifill: HILLARY CLINTON WAS
TALKING ABOUT INCOME INEQUALITY.
>> AND THE DECK IS STACKED WHICH
ELIZABETH WARREN IS NOW USING.
SHE'S CLEARING, ON ECONOMIC
ISSUES, I DON'T KNOW THERE IS
THAT MUCH ROOM IN TERMS OF
SOMEBODY LIKE BERNIE SANDERS TO
OUTFLANK HER.
I THINK WHERE HER PROBLEM POINTS
ARE WITH A LOT OF THE LIBERAL
DEVILS WILL BE ON THE TRADE
ISSUE AND BE OVER BY THE TIME WE
HIT IOWA AND REALLY ON FOREIGN
POLICY.
THAT'S REALLY GOING TO BE THE
QUESTION OF A SANDERS OR MARTIN
O'MALLEY TO REALLY GOAT HILLARY
CLINTON ON QUESTIONS OF WHAT --
NOT ONLY WHAT DID SHE DO IN 2003
AND THE WAR IN IRAQ, BUT WHAT
ABOUT NOW AND WHAT ABOUT HER
TIME AS SECRETARY OF STATE.
>> Ifill: WHICH BRINGS US TO
WHO IS GOING TO ASK THE
QUESTIONS.
TAMARA YOU HAD A GOOD PIECE ON
THE RADIO ABOUT HILLARY
CLINTON'S QUESTION TAKING WHICH
IS TO SAY NOT VERY MUCH.
FIRST OF ALL, TELL US WHAT YOU
FOUND WHEN YOU LOOK TO SEE HOW
MA QUENYSTIONS SHE'S TAKEN SINCE
BEING A CANDIDATE.
>> SHE HAD ANOTHER EVENT TODAY
AND DID NOT TAKE ANY QUESTIONS
FROM REPORTERS.
SO WE CAN KEEP THE NUMBERS THE
SAME.
SHE HAS TAKEN 13 QUESTIONS THAT
SHE ANSWERED, SOME INCLUDED HOW
ARE YOU FEELING, AND SOMETHING
ALONG THE LINES OF HOW AWESOME
IS IOWA!
(LAUGHTER)
NOT EXACTLY, BUT CLOSE.
AND HER CAMPAIGN FEELS LIKE THIS
IS THE RAMPUP PHASE WHERE IT'S
NOT ABOUT HER ANSWERING
QUESTIONS, IT'S ABOUT HER
HEARING FROM PEOPLE AND THAT'S
WHATWARE R THEY'RE
GUESS WHAT THERE AREN'T A LOT OF
CONSEQUENCES.
MOST TO HAVE THE REACTION I GOT
TO MY STORY IS, LIKE, HEY,
REPORTERS, STOP WHINING.
>> Ifill: IS THAT A PRETTY
GOOD BET IS IT'S NOT WORTH
REPORTERS TO PRESS.
>> THIS IS DEFINITELY INSIDE
BASEBALL.
THIS IS THE SORT OF THINGS WHERE
VOTERS SAY, YOU KNOW, THIS IS
STUFF REPORTERS CARE ABOUT, NOT
ANYBODY ELSE.
AT THE SAME TIME, IT IS TURNING
INTO AN ISSUE THAT REPUBLICANS
ARE USING, TOO, TO BANG HILLARY
CLINTON ACROSS THE HEAD WITH,
SAYING, YOU KNOW, SEE, THIS IS
JUST PART OF THE THEME AROUND
HER.
SHE HAS A SECRETIVE EMAIL
SERVER, SHE HAS SECRETIVE DONORS
TO THE CLINTON GLOBAL
FOUNDATION, SHE HAS A SUPERIOR
SENSE SHE CAN PLAY BY DIFFERENT
RULES THAN US.
ANSWERING QUESTIONS?
SHE DOESN'T NEED TO ANSWER
QUESTIONS, BUT IF THIS EVOLVES
THAT SHE SEEMS OUT OF TOUCH --
>> Ifill: LET'S FLIP THIS ON
ITS HEAD BECAUSE HAST WEEK WE
SAW WHAT HAPPENS WHEN JEB BUSH
ANSWERS QUESTIONS.
HE KEPT COMING UP DIFFERENT
VERSIONS OF HIS ANSWERS.
DOES IT NOT PAY TO LEAVE
YOURSELF OPEN?
>> AND SHE NOTES COMPETING
AGAINST 19 OTHER PEOPLE.
JEB BUSH, THE PEOPLE WHO DEFEND
HIM SAY WELL AT LEAST HE WAS
ANSWERING QUESTIONS.
BUT GOSH DARN IT --
>> Ifill: DID IT HELP?
-- IF THERE IS ONE QUESTION
JEB BUSH HAS TO ANSWER IT'S
ABOUT THE IRAQ WAR AND HE REALLY
STRUGGLED WITH IT.
IT WAS A REAL PROBLEM AND SORT
OF PLANTED TO ALL THE FAMILY
BAGGAGE HE'S TRYING TO GET AWAY
FROM.
>> Ifill: PART OF HIS ANSWER
WAS AT ONE POINT, I DON'T NEED
TO ANSWER THE HYPOTHETICALS.
MIKE HUCKABEE SAID, I DON'T HAVE
TO DEFEND EVERYTHING I'VE DONE,
WHEN TALKING ABOUT A
DIABETICMATION HE USED TO PEDAL.
ISN'T RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT
HYPOTHETICAL?
>> I THINK THE BEST WAY FOR THE
CANDIDATES TO RESPOND IS TO SAY,
THIS HAS ALREADY HAPPENED.
WE KNOW THAT.
LET'S STOP TRYING TO PARSE
AROUND HYPOTHETICAL WHAT WOULD
HAPPEN IF X, Y OR Z WOULD HAVE
HAPPENED.
BUT WHAT ARE WE DOING GOING INTO
THE FUTURE?
I THINK THAT'S P BIGGER PROBLEM
FOR ALL OF THE CANDIDATES.
IRAQ IS A MESS, THE MIDDLE EAST
IS A MESS.
THE PARTIES HAVE BEEN POINTING
FINGERS BETWEEN IT WAS BUSH'S
FAULT, OBAMA'S FAULT, NOW THE
CANDIDATES HAVE TO COME UP WITH
IS WHAT YOUR PLAN GOING FORWARD.
THAT'S WHAT VOTERS WANT TO HEAR
AND ARE NOT REALLY INTERESTED IN
WHOSE FAULT IT WAS THAT IT'S
SUCH A MESS.
>> Ifill: WE STARTED THE
CONVERSATION TALKING ABOUT
WHETHER THERE IS ROOM ON THE
LEFT FOR THE BERNIE SANDERSES OF
THE WORLD TO RUN AGAINST THE
HILLARY CLINTONS OF THE WORLD.
IS THERE A LOT OF ROOM ON THE
RIGHT FOR REPUBLICANS LIKE RAND
PAUL OR MARCO RUBIO TO TAKE DOWN
JEB BUSH IF HE IS CONSIDERED
STILL TO BE THE FRONTRUNNER?
>> I THINK JEB BUSH HAS THIS BIG
TARGET ON HIMSELF, BUT THESE
OTHER CANDIDATES ARE FINDING
PLENTY OF LANE, AND IT'S REALLY
UNCLEAR.
JEB BUSH WILL SOME POINT SAY HE
OFFICIALLY IS GOING TO RUN FOR
PRESIDENT AND WILL HAVE AN
AMAZING AMOUNT OF MONEY, BUT
IT'S UNCLEAR WHETHER HE HAS THE
EXCITEMENT OF VOTERS OR WHETHER
THE OTHER FOLKS OFFICIALLY
RUNNING WILL KEEP BEATING HIM
UP, UP UNTIL THEN.
>> THIS IS WHAT'S FUN ABOUT THIS
RACE IS YOU HAVE SO MANY
CANDIDATES WHO ARE VERY
QUALIFIED AND THEY HAVE SO MANY
DIFFERENT POSITIONS.
THIS IS NOT ONE SORT OF
MONOLITHIC GROUP SINGING FROM
THE SAME BOOK.
THEY HAVE MANY -- YOU KNOW, THE
MANY DIFFERENT POSITIONS WHICH
IS REALLY THE BIG QUESTION FOR
REPUBLICANS IN 2016.
WHO IS GOING TO BE ABLE TO UNIT
ALL THE MANY VOICES INTO ONE
FOCUSED VOICE GOING INTO THE
GENERAL ELECTION.
THIS IS REALLY A CROSSROADS
ELECTION FOR THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY, WHO THEY, ARE WHAT THEY
STAND FOR, DO THEY HAVE A
POSITIVE MESSAGE GOING FORWARD.
I THINK THIS PRIMARY PROCESS
WILL BE GOOD FOR THEM.
>> IF YOU CAN FIT THIS ON A
DEBATE STAGE.
>> THAT'S THE PROBLEM.
>> Ifill: THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANKS.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
SOCIAL MEDIA AS A PUBLIC SHAMING
TOOL.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE LATEST
FROM THE NEWSHOUR BOOKSHELF.
>> Brown: IN DECEMBER 2013, A
YOUNG WOMAN NAMED JUSTINE SACCO
WROTE THIS TWEET: "GOING TO
AFRICA.
HOPE I DON'T GET AIDS.
JUST KIDDING.
I'M WHITE."
SHE HIT "SEND" AND OUT IT WENT
TO HER 170 FOLLOWERS.
>> SHE GOT ON THE PLANE, TURNED
OFF HER PHONE, WOKE UP 11 HOURS
LATER AND DISCOVERED THAT HER
LIFE WAS UTTERLY DESTROYED.
>> Brown: SHE WAS A TWITTER
SENSATION.
>> THE WORLDWIDE NUMBER ONE.
>> Brown: IN THE WORST WAY.
>> IN THE WORST WAY.
IT WAS HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
TWEETS ALONG THE LINES OF "WE'RE
ABOUT TO GET THIS WOMAN FIRED IN
REAL TIME BEFORE SHE EVEN KNOWS
SHE'S BEING FIRED."
>> Brown: THE BLITZ OF ONLINE
OUTRAGE DID INDEED LEAD SACCO'S
COMPANY TO FIRE HER.
SHE SAID LATER SHE THOUGHT WAS
MAKING A JOKE ABOUT HER OWN
PRIVILEGE.
BUT THAT'S NOT HOW THE
TWITTERVERSE HEARD IT.
HER STORY IS JUST ONE OF MANY
TOLD IN THE NEW BOOK "SO YOU'VE
BEEN PUBLICLY SHAMED."
THE AUTHOR IS JON RONSON, A MAN
WHO KNOWS HIS WAY AROUND
TWITTER-- HE HAS 112,000
FOLLOWERS AND HAS SENT OUT MORE
THAN 45,000 TWEETS HIMSELF.
SO WE'RE IN A RENAISSANCE OF
PUBLIC SHAMING, YOU WRITE,
BROUGHT ABOUT SOCIAL MEDIA AND
THE INTERNET.
>> YES.
BROUGHT ABOUT BY THIS SORT OF
WEIRD APPROVAL MACHINE THAT IS
SOCIAL MEDIA.
SO WE START TO UNCOVER A
TRANSGRESSOR, SOMETIMES FOR SOME
INAPPROPRIATE PHRASEOLOGY OR
SOME TWEET, AND THEN WE PILE ON
THAT PERSON BECAUSE WE SURROUND
OURSELVES ON SOCIAL MEDIA WITH
PEOPLE WHO FEEL THE SAME WAY WE
DO.
WE JUST MUTUALLY APPROVE EACH
OTHER AS WE CARRY ON TEARING
THAT PERSON APART.
>> Brown: ONE OF THE THINGS
YOU'RE WRITING ABOUT, ON THE ONE
HAND WE ALL HAVE SOMETHING WE
WANT TO HIDE, OR AT LEAST THAT
WE DON'T WANT COMING OUT PUBLIC,
RIGHT?
ON THE OTHER HAND, WE NOW HAVE
THIS TECHNOLOGY THAT ALLOWS
EVERYTHING TO COME OUT AND IT
COMES OUT IN THE NASTIEST WAYS.
>> YES.
>> Brown: EVEN ABOUT RELATIVELY
SMALL THINGS.
>> YEAH!
IT'S SO INTERESTING YOU SAY THAT
BECAUSE THIS IS WHAT'S
HAPPENING: WE ARE DESTROYING
PEOPLE ROUTINELY DAILY AND
DESTROYING THEM WITH THE THING
WE ARE MOST TERRIFIED WOULD
HAPPEN TO US.
YOU KNOW WE ALL OF US HAVE
BUBBLING AWAY WITHIN US
SOMETHING THAT WE'RE JUST
TERRIFIED WOULD DESTROY OUR
REPUTATION IF IT CAME OUT.
AND YET WE ARE DOING EXACTLY
THAT TO OTHER PEOPLE.
>> Brown: IN OTHER WORDS, PUBLIC
SHAMING, ONCE METED OUT IN THE
STOCKS IN THE TOWN SQUARE, IS
NOW CARRIED OUT IN THE NEW TOWN
SQUARE OF SOCIAL MEDIA.
RONSON TELLS OF NUMEROUS CASES,
WELL KNOWN ONES LIKE WRITER
JONAH LEHRER, WHO WAS CAUGHT FOR
EMBELLISHING AND FABRICATING
PARTS OF HIS STORIES.
AND LESSER KNOWN TALES, LIKE
LINDSEY STONE'S, WHO WAS FIRED
FROM HER JOB AFTER POSTING WHAT
SHE THOUGHT WAS A FUNNY PHOTO OF
HERSELF MAKING A VULGAR GESTURE
AT ARLINGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY.
THE STORIES CAN BE HARROWING,
AND COMPLICATED-- AFFECTING BOTH
SHAMEE AND SHAMER.
>> I WROTE ABOUT A MAN CALLED
HANK WHO JUST WHISPERED A
SLIGHTLY BEAVIS AND BUTTHEAD
TYPE SEXIST JOKE TO THE GUY
SITTING NEXT TO HIM AT A
CONFERENCE ABOUT BIG DONGLES AND
THE WOMAN SITTING IN FRONT
OVERHEARD IT AND UNBEKNOWNST TO
THEM PHOTOGRAPHED THEM AND
POSTED IT ON TWITTER, WITH THE
COMMENT "NOT COOL. JOKES AROUND
BIG NGLEDOS RIGHT BEHIND ME,"
AND THE NEXT DAY HE WAS FIRED
FROM HIS JOB.
AND THEN AS REVENGE, SHE WAS
DESTROYED AND SHE HAD TWO YEARS
OF RAPE THREATS AND DEATH
THREATS.
>> Brown: WE'RE IN THE EARLY
DAYS OF SOCIAL MEDIA, RIGHT?
DO YOU THINK THIS IS THE
IMMATURITY OR THE EARLY PERIOD
AND THAT WE MIGHT GROW OUT OF
IT?
>> I THINK PEOPLE WILL GROW OUT
OF IT.
I THINK RIGHT NOW WE'RE LIKE
TODDLERS CRAWLING TOWARDS A GUN.
I HOPE AND THINK MY BOOK'S GOING
TO CONTRIBUTE TO THAT BECAUSE MY
BOOK IS LIKE A VISIT TO THE
SLAUGHTER HOUSE.
>> Brown: A VISIT TO THE
SLAUGHTER HOUSE?
>> YEAH.
I JOURNEY INTO THE HOMES OF
PEOPLE WHO WERE DESTROYED AS A
RESULT OF HITHERTO UNEMPOWERED
PEOPLE HAVING POWER.
AND NOT WORKING OUT HOW TO USE
IT JUDICIOUSLY AND THEY'RE
CRUSHED.
IT MANGLES THEM.
>> Brown: I'M WONDERING HOW YOU
SEE YOUR ROLE AS SORT OF
INVESTIGATOR BUT PARTICIPANT.
YOU EVEN WRITE IN THE BOOK ABOUT
HAVING, AS A JOURNALIST,
PARTICIPATED IN SHAMING, IN A
SENSE.
>> YEAH.
AND I'M VERY GLAD I'M NOT DOING
THAT ANYMORE.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Brown: YOU'RE A REFORMED
SHAMER.
>> I'M A REFORMED SHAMER.
YOU KNOW SOCIAL MEDIA LIKE ISTH
IS STAGE FOR CONSTANT
ARTIFICIALLY HIGH DRAMAS.
EVERYBODY'S EITHER A MAGNIFICENT
HERO OR SICKENING VILLAIN.
BUT THAT ISN'T TRUE ABOUT HUMAN
BEINGS.
WE ARE DIMENSIONAL.
AND YOU KNOW WHAT?
THE CURE FOR BEING CAST OUT IS
BEING BROUGHT BACK IN WITH
COMPASSION AND EMPATHY.
AND MY BOOK IS REALLY A CALL FOR
PEOPLE TO BE MORE EMPAETICTH.
>> Brown: ALRIGHT, SO "YOU'VE
BEEN PUBLICLY SHAMED."
JON RONSON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, IF YOU KNOW WHO DON
DRAPER IS, THEN YOU ARE
PROBABLY AMONG THOSE WHO WERE ON
HAND FOR THE SERIES FINALE LAST
NIGHT OF "MAD MEN."
IT GOT US TO THINKING: IT WAS A
GREAT WATER COOLER SHOW, BUT
WHERE DOES IT RANK AMONG
TELEVISION'S GREATEST?
WE ASKED A FEW CRITICS TO NAME
THEIR TOP FIVE SHOWS OF ALL
TIME.
YOU CAN SEE THEIR ANSWERS, AND
SHARE YOUR OWN ON OUR WEB SITE,
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: TUNE IN LATER
THIS EVENING, ON INDEPENDENT
LENS: HOW A GROUP OF ORDINARY
CITIZENS BROKE INTO AN F.B.I.
OFFICE IN 1971 TO EXPOSE AN
ILLEGAL SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM.
AND ON CHARLIE ROSE, FORMER
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ROBERT
GATES ON IRAN, THE ISLAMIC
STATE, AND THE CHALLENGES IN THE
MIDDLE EAST.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE LOOK AT HOW SOME
HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES ARE STRUGGLING TO
SURVIVE.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
JOIN US ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.